## history of java 
java was introduced in the year of 1991 by james gosling.
He along with his team was working in the company names sun-microsystem. He faced some issue like 
security
platform architecture etc.
**currently oracle is the owner of java.
**Java was developed mainly to build internet best/based application.
**java has two parent
1. C - from c it has taken syntax excluding pointers.
2.  C++ - from c++ OPPS concept.

## Programming language
- programming language is used to interact with the machine,
- A language whiuch is used to write the program is called a programming language
- Based on human understanding it is classified in three types:
1. High level language : A language which is completely understandable by human but not by machine is called 
  high level language  - java , c++ , c , python.
2. Mid?Intermediate level : A language which nethier completely understandable by human nor by machine 
  is called as mid level language - Bytecode
3. Low level/Binary/Machine level language : A language which is not understyandable by human 
   but completely understandable by machine 
  ex: 0's and 1's


## compiler 
It a software Which is used to convert high level language into low level language.

## Features of java
1. It is simple as compare to c
2. It is plateform Independent
3. It is secure
4. It has high performance
5. It is an efficient language
6. It supports OPPS
7. It supports multithreading(Multitasking)
8. It is portable
9. It is Robust (Widely Used)
10.   It has a large community support
11. It is strictly typed language 
12. It is case-sensative
13. It is architectural neutral language
14. It is secure
15. Highly performance
16. Good memory management because of garbage collector

## Ques : Why java is platform independent language ?

## sourceCode ----> Compiler(JavaC)---->ByteCode(platformIndependent) -----> JVM(pleteformDependent) ----> 1.Windows 2.Mac 3.Linux 

1. java is a two-step compilation based language it means compiler and interpreter both will work.
2. First compiler will work and convert java source code into ByteCode(mid level code).
3. After that JVM will take this bytecode as an input and convert it into the machine code.
4. It means it doent matter from which platform we are getting the byteCode we will get the same output on all the plateform.
5. This is the reason why java is plateform dependent language.

## Why java is secure ?
1. Because it does not support pointer that is  why we cannot get actual location of memory . so we cannot get the access the actual 
address of a memory variable.
2. jvm is responsible to convert bytecode into machine code
3. Before executing the bytecode it will check 
 - whether the bytecode is generated by the valid compiler or not
 - whether the bytecode is properly structured or not 
 - Whether the bytecode is properly structured or not 
 - if it finds any problem it stops executing the bytecode.

## Why java is high performance ?
 - JVM executes the bytecode line by line 
 - suppose we invoke a function multiple times then - inside jvm we have a component known as JIT compiler will
   directly execute the bytecode into machine code.

## Java source file
- A file which contains instructions of java language is known as java source file.
- its extention will be .java

  ______________
## JDK - Java Development Kit 
- It contains all the necessary tools to develop a java program
-  Hierarchy of JDK
- JDK -----> JRE ------> JVM 
- JRE (JAVA RUNTIME ENVIRONMENT)
  1. It provides a run time environment to execute a java program

- JVM 
  1. JAVA VIRTUAL MACHINE 
  2. It is an interpreter which is resposible for execute a java program 

- 3 steps to execute a java program
  1. Create a source file - create source file by using normal text editor notepad , 
  2. We can also use advance code editor vsCode , eclipse , intelligIdea.
  3. To create a source file we just need to create a file by any one the editor and save it by .java extention.
  4. Compile the source file - we need to compile the source file after the successfuly compilation ,
     compiler will generate bytecode file with name .class file 
  5. During the compilation the compiler will check rules and regulation (Syntax and semantics ).
  6. If compiler finds any mistake or error the compiler will throw an error and compiler will not generate .class
     file
  7. Syntax for the compilation
     1. javac source-file Name.java
     2. Ex : javac name.java
  8. Execution the .class file - In this stage we need to give .class file as an input to the
     JVM will execute this and give us output.
  9. syntax for the execution:-
     1. java className
     2. javaSourceFile -----> compilation ---> .classFile ------> JVM -----> output

## # Basic structure of java program.
- First we need to create a file and save it with .java extension
  inside the file we can write our java instruction
- Inside a file we can create a class
  1. class - it is a predefined word 
  2. it must be written in the lowercase 
  3. it is used to create a class block
  4. class Demo {  Class-Block }
  5. file name and class name can be different ... It is not necessary to have same name class and file  
  6. Inside the class we can have the following components
     1. method
     2. variable
     3. constructor 
     4. static Initializer
     5. non static Initializer
     6. class

## Tokens 
   1. This is the smallest component of any programming language which helps to write a program.
   2. In , java we have follow tokens.
      - keyword
      - identifier 
      - literals
      - separator
      - comments
      - operators
      - 
   3. Keyword
      - it is a predefined word 
      - it has special meaning / own meaning all the keyword written in the lowercase.
      - In , java we have 50+ keyword ---> Exactly 53
      
   4. Identifiers
      - It is the name given to recognize class in java
      - we cannot give any name we have to follow sum rules.
      - Rules of identifiers
        1. Cannot be started with number.
        2. Only '$' and '_' are used as a special character apart from these no special character can be used in an identifier.
        3. Spaces is not allowed in an identifier.
        4. Keyword cannot be used as an identifier.
   
      - Conventions
        1. it is not a rule of an identifier itr is just an industrial standard, which we should follow while 
           giving to the identifiers.
        2. Class Convention.
           1. class should be written in upper Camel-case.
           2. Every word first letter should be written in UpperCase
           3. convention for interface is the same.
        3. Method Convention 
           1. lower camel case.
           2. it means if it contains only one word it should be written 
              in the lowercase  , but if it contains multiple word from the second word onwards first word of each letter
              should be written in smallCase.
           3. Same convention for variables is followed.
      
   5. Literals
       1. it is a data pass by a programmer in a program.
       2. In java there have 4 types of literals
          1. Number ---> Types ----> Integer , Floating point
          2. Character 
          3. Boolean 
          4. String
          5. Number Literals:
             1. it can be of two types 
             2. 1. Integer 2. floating point
          6. Character Literals
             1. Anything which is enclosed within single quote and its length is exactly 1 is known as 
                character literals.
          7. Boolean Literals 
             1. it represents a logical data or a condition.
             2. it has two types 1. true 2. false
             3. true and false is a keyword 
          8. String literals 
             1. Anything which is passed within double quote is known as String literals
          9. separators 
             1. it is used to separate one component to another.
             2. , , ; , { } , : , () , . , 
          
          10. Comments
              1. its is the non-executable code which is used to increase the readabilty of the code.
              2. Types - Single Line , Multiline Comment
              3. Example : // This code is not readable as it is a comment and not going to execute.
              4. Example: /* 
                 This is a 
                 multi line comment
                */
          
          11. Operators
          

## Display Statement

 1. The statement which is used to print a message on the console . In java we have two types of display statement.
     i. System.out.println();
     ii.System.out.print();
     iii. System.out.printf();
2. System.out.println() : it is used to print a message on console. After that cursor will go on next line.
    1. example : System.out.println("hello");
       console is nothing just a collection of grid.
    2. it can be used without passing any data.
3. System.out.print()
   1. it is used to print the message on console after printing the cursor will go to the next position.
   2. it cannot be used without any data.


## variable
 1. It is a block of memory(Container) which is used to store a data.
 2. Every variable has some name so we can also call it as named block of memory.
    3. Declaration of memory....
       syntax : datatype identifier;
       Datatype: it specifies which type of data needs to be stored inside a block of memory.
    4. In java we have following datatype
       1. Primitive datatype
          1. It is a predefined datatype which is used to store primitive value/data
          2. In java we have follow  data type.
             1. byte ---> Integer--->1byte--->0
             2. short ----> Integer----> 2byte---->0
             3. long ----> Integer -----> 8byte---->0l/L
             4. int ----> Integer -----> 4byte----> 0
             5. float ----> float ----> 4byte ---- 0.0f
             6. char -----> character -----> 2byte ---> 'u\0000' 
             7. boolean ----> boolean ----> 1 bit ----> false;
             8. double -----> double -----> 8byte ----> 0.0
          3. Since these are predefined data type so it should be in the lowercase.
          4. after the decimal point if you want to store 5-6 no. you can use float but if you want to more decimal no 
              after point you can use double.
          
       2. Non-primitive data type
                           
      



## charateristics of variable
   1. it is temporary 
   2. it has a lifespan
   3. inside a variable you can add a single value , inside a variable you can store fetch and update a data.
   4. Initialize a variable
      byte b; declaration.
      b = 25; initialize.
            or
      byte b = 34;
## how declare multiple variable of same datatype.
   1. syntax: 
      - Datatypes identifier1 , identifier2 , identifier3 ....... identifier-n;
      - ex : int a ;
      - int b;
      - int c;
      int a , b , c;
      - byte n1;
      - double n2; 
      - float n3;
        byte n1 , double n2 , float n3; X XXX  not allowed error;
      - syntax :
          datatype identifier1 = value , identifier2 = value, identifier3 = value
   ## types of variable.
   1. Based on datatype
      - primitive variable
      - Non-primitive variable
   2. based on scope
      - Global variable i. static ii. non-static
      - Local variable
   # primitive datatype : 
   - A variable which is used to store primitive variable. primitive variable has fixed size.
   - ex : int a = 2 , byte b = 23 , float f = 2.6 ,  double a = 123.56845 

   # Non primitive varible 
   - it is used to store multi-value data
   - it is a user defined - it is created with the help of non-primitive data type.
   - Ex : Array , String , Object - syntax -> String s = null;

   # Based on scope: 
   - Global scope
   - Local Scope
   - Here scope means visibility of the variable
   - Local variable
     - A variable which is declared inside the method block or any other specific block.
     - class demo{
     - public static void main(String[] args){
     - char a = 'e'; //local variable
     - }
     - }
     - Rules of local variable:
     - we cannot use it outside the block because local variable is visible only within 
       the block where it is declared.
     - We cannot use it without initialization.
     - We cannot have more than one local variable with the same name within the same block.
   
   # operators 
   - It is a predefined symbol which is used to perform specific task.
   - Operand : Operand is the data on which operator works.
   - ex 10 + 20 operand - 10 and 20 + is operator
   - combination of operator and operand ex: 10 + 20 , 1*2 + 5  6;
   - characteristics of operator
   - Every operator after performing a task will return a data or value.
   - Every operator has some precedence or priority.
   - every operator follows rules of associativity. it means direction of execution . It means when two or more operator having
     the same precedence either from left to right or right to left.
   - Associativity has always not the same 
   - Note : In an expression of we have multiple operator then first it is evaluated based on the precedence of operator
     but two or more operator having same precedence then we have to solve according to associativity.
   - Types of operator
   - Based on operand
     - Unary
     - Binary
     - Ternary
   - Based on task
     - Arithmetic
     - increment/Decrement
     - Relational
     - Assignment
       - compound assignment
     - Logical operator
     - conditional operator
     - Bitwise operator
   
   - Based on the operand operator is classified into three types.
     unary : an operator which takes only one operand to perform a task is called unary operator
     ex: increment , decrement and logical not operator.
   - Binary operator : An operator which takes only two operand to perform a task is called unary operator.
     ex : Arithmetic relational operator , Assignment and relational.
   - Ternary : An operator which takes exactly operand to perform a task is called ternary operator.
      ex : conditional operator .
   - Based on the task:
     - Arithmetic operator : it is a binary operator which is used to perform an arithmetic operation
       ex : Addition(+) , subtraction(-) , multiplication(*) , division(/) , modulus(%)
       - it is used to add two numeric value - Integer and decimal - In addition operator in any one of operand 
       - of string type then instead of addition it will perform concatenation.
     
   - Modulus operator : it is used to divide a number and return a number.

     
     
               
          
       
       
      